README.md, before:

# IDAES Extensions

This repository hosts IDAES binary extensions.  These extensions include solvers and function libraries.  These binary extensions are intended for use with the IDAES Process Modeling Framework https://github.com/IDAES/idaes-pse.

## Testing

Latest binary test results are [here](test_status.md). The results are just for the latest testing release.  All othere released binaries were tested and work with the corresonding IDEAS-PSE release.

## Getting Extensions

If you have the IDAES framework installed, you can get the extensions by running the following command:

```sh
idaes get-extensions
```

You can also download a particular release of the extensions by providing a URL:

```sh
idaes get-extensions --url <url>
```

To get a build for a particular platform, there is a platform option:

```sh
idaes get-extensions --platform <platform>
```

Current platform options are: centos6, centos7, centos8, rhel6, rhel7, rhel8, ubuntu1804, ubuntu1910, ubuntu2004, windows, and darwin.  Darwin (Mac) is not currently available, but will be soon.  Currently if no platform is specified on Linux, the "centos7" build will be used.

## Contents

The extensions contain a version of the IPOPT solver compiled the HSL linear solver library, for which IDAES has obtained
a distribution license. All technical papers, sales and publicity material resulting from use of the HSL codes within IPOPT
must contain the following acknowledgement: HSL, a collection of Fortran codes for large-scale scientific computation. See http://www.hsl.rl.ac.uk. The Ipopt source code for IDAES was modified only to add additional messages as required by the HSL
distribution license.  The modified Ipopt code is available here https://github.com/IDAES/Ipopt/tree/idaes-3.12.13.

See https://github.com/IDAES/idaes-ext/blob/master/license.txt for additional information on third-party code contained
in the binaries.

## Building

The scripts directory contains scripts for building binary packages for installation.  These scripts are generally intended for use by the IDAES team in preparing binaries for release, and are not general purpose tools.

To build the IDAES binaries.  
  1) Clone this repo to idaes-ext.
  2) ```cd ./ideas-ext```
  3) (Optional) Copy HSL files to ```coinhsl``` in ```idaes-ext```
  4) ```bash scripts/compile_solvers.sh <osname>```
  5) ```bash scripts/compile_libs.sh <osname>```
  6) There should be two tar.gz files one with executable solvers and the other with shared libraries in the dist-lib and dist-solvers directories. Add the operating system postfix to the file names. These can be installed with the ```idaes get-extension``` script

## Build Environments

### Windows and Linux

Refer to the Dockerfiles. 

### OSX

**TODO**

Commit message:

Update readme to include Pynumero and k_aug

README.md, after:

# IDAES Extensions

This repository hosts IDAES binary extensions.  These extensions include solvers and function libraries.  These binary extensions are intended for use with the IDAES Process Modeling Framework https://github.com/IDAES/idaes-pse.

## Testing

Latest binary test results are [here](test_status.md). The results are just for the latest testing release.  All othere released binaries were tested and work with the corresonding IDEAS-PSE release.

## Getting Extensions

If you have the IDAES framework installed, you can get the extensions by running the following command:

```sh
idaes get-extensions
```

You can also download a particular release of the extensions by providing a URL:

```sh
idaes get-extensions --url <url>
```

To get a build for a particular platform, there is a platform option:

```sh
idaes get-extensions --platform <platform>
```

Current platform options are: centos6, centos7, centos8, rhel6, rhel7, rhel8, ubuntu1804, ubuntu1910, ubuntu2004, windows, and darwin.  Darwin (Mac) is not currently available, but will be soon.  Currently if no platform is specified on Linux, the "centos7" build will be used.

## Contents

The extensions contain a version of the IPOPT solver compiled the HSL linear solver library, for which IDAES has obtained
a distribution license. All technical papers, sales and publicity material resulting from use of the HSL codes within IPOPT
must contain the following acknowledgement: HSL, a collection of Fortran codes for large-scale scientific computation. See http://www.hsl.rl.ac.uk. The Ipopt source code for IDAES was modified only to add additional messages as required by the HSL
distribution license.  The modified Ipopt code is available here https://github.com/IDAES/Ipopt/tree/idaes-3.12.13.

A build Pynumero-ASL is included, see https://github.com/Pyomo/pyomo/tree/master/pyomo/contrib/pynumero.  The Pynumero build specifically excludes the HSL functions.

A build of k\_aug is included that used the HSL ma57 linear solver, for which the IDAES project has obtained a distribution license.  For more information on, k\_aug see https://github.com/dthierry/k_aug.   

See https://github.com/IDAES/idaes-ext/blob/master/license.txt for additional information on third-party code contained
in the binaries.



## Building

The scripts directory contains scripts for building binary packages for installation.  These scripts are generally intended for use by the IDAES team in preparing binaries for release, and are not general purpose tools.

To build the IDAES binaries.  
  1) Clone this repo to idaes-ext.
  2) ```cd ./ideas-ext```
  3) (Optional) Copy HSL files to ```coinhsl``` in ```idaes-ext```
  4) ```bash scripts/compile_solvers.sh <osname>```
  5) ```bash scripts/compile_libs.sh <osname>```
  6) There should be two tar.gz files one with executable solvers and the other with shared libraries in the dist-lib and dist-solvers directories. Add the operating system postfix to the file names. These can be installed with the ```idaes get-extension``` script

## Build Environments

### Windows and Linux

Refer to the Dockerfiles.

### OSX

**TODO**
